---
layout: post
title: Nokia E63
tags:
- nokia
- symbian
- python
---
After living the last few years without a mobile phone it finally became a
problem for me so recently I decided to get a new one. I only needed something
simple for receiving calls, not making them so any kind of plan or contract
was out of the question since I could spend a few bucks on pre-paid and
theoretically not pay anything after that. I didn't consider any of the latest
smart-phones either like the HTC or iPhone (I wouldn't buy a crippled device
anyway) since they're so ridiculously priced compared to lower end models that
aren't even a year old.

I ended up getting a [Nokia E63](http://www.nokia.com.au/find-products/all-
phones/nokia-e63) that has a full qwerty keyboard and wireless LAN access
which were the main selling points for me. It cost $299 when it was being sold
for over $500 at other places around town so it felt like a smart purchase.
Apart from those features I looked at, I really knew nothing about the phone
and [Symbian OS](http://symbian.org/) which powers it and after taking a
closer look at the software available for it I've been really surprised.

<div class="side-thumb">
<img src="/static/img/e63-google.png">Google Apps for Symbian OS
<img src="/static/img/e63-putty.png">Putty for Symbian OS
<img src="/static/img/e63-python.png">Python (PyS60) on Symbian OS
</div>

Google has created a [handful of Symbian
apps](http://www.google.com/mobile/products.html#p=default) for things like
gmail, reader, youtube and maps which all work great. The other day I found an
app called [fring](http://www.fring.com) which is very similar to
[Pidgin](http://pidgin.im/) in that it wraps up all the various IM clients
into one, even including Skype with voice working! So it has essentially
turned my phone into a Skype handset which is amazing. I've also found that
there's a version of [putty for Symbian](http://s2putty.sourceforge.net/) so I
can actually SSH onto any of our Linux servers or desktops and access the
shell from my phone!

The most incredible thing I've found for Symbian however has been a project
called [PyS60](https://garage.maemo.org/projects/pys60/) — Nokia has actually
ported the Python run-time to the Symbian OS. I was amazed once I had this
installed and was sitting there typing out Python code into an interactive
console directly on my phone. The standard library is even included and it's
very interesting — certain pieces aren't fully ported but it comes with a
handful of modules specifically for PyS60 which handle things like locating
wireless networks and working with the user interface. It even includes
[OpenGL](http://www.opengl.org/) bindings which is unbelievable — that's
right, you can develop 3D games in Python for your phone.

I'm well into developing my first app which is a small RPC server for the
phone controlled by a [wxWidgets](http://wxwidgets.org/) client. The idea is
to be able to traverse the phone's file system and create, edit and execute
Python apps on the phone from a remote machine. The SimpleXMLRPCServer module
isn't included with PyS60 and broke when I tried to copy it onto the phone and
import it manually. I've since been able to patch it and get it working which
I've [submitted to Nokia](https://garage.maemo.org/tracker/index.php?func=deta
il&aid=4576&group_id=854&atid=3201), hopefully they'll include it in their
next release.
