---
layout: post
title: "2010: My Year in Review"
published: false
tags:
- python
- django
- open source
- mezzanine
- django dash
---

This was an amazing year for me professionally. I learnt and achieved much
more than I've historically packed into a single year, so like many other I've
decided to jump on the _year in review_ bandwagon and put this post
together.

### Open Source

Prior to 2010 I'd certainly used open source quite heavily, in fact I'd based
my entire career as a developer around it, focusing on
[Python](http://python.org/), [Django](http://www.djangoproject.com/) and
[Linux](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux) and the open source ecosystem
surrounding this amazing platform. However as far as giving back to the
community went, I had only ever contributed small bug fixes and enhancements
to a handful of open source projects over the years, and had never been
heavily involved in any single project. So in 2010 I dived in head first
launching a range of open source projects. Firstly some smaller utilities such
as [django-forms-builder](https://github.com/stephenmcd/django-forms-builder)
and [gunicorn-console](https://github.com/stephenmcd/gunicorn-console), and
then the [Django content management platform
Mezzanine](http://mezzanine.jupo.org/), along with its [shopping cart plug-in,
Cartridge.](http://cartridge.jupo.org/)

The reception Mezzanine has received has been nothing short of amazing and
well beyond anything I had anticipated. It's been an incredibly rewarding
learning experience, managing product development and working closely with its
contributors towards growing its community. Here are a few statistics for the
project only 6 months since it was launched:

  * 120 followers and 30 forks across [GitHub](https://github.com/stephenmcd/mezzanine) and [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/stephenmcd/mezzanine)
  * Code contributions from [10 developers](http://mezzanine.jupo.org/docs/colophon.html#authors)
  * A [mailing list](http://groups.google.com/group/mezzanine-users/topics) with over 60 members and over 300 messages
  * Over 4,000 downloads from the [Python Package Index](http://pypi.python.org/pypi)
  * Almost 9,000 visitors to the [website](http://mezzanine.jupo.org/) with over a 50% return rate

### Team Leadership

Shortly prior to 2010 I moved into the role of development team lead and 2010
provided me with a wealth of new experience in this regard. Being responsible
for a development team producing rock solid work has always been an aspiration
of mine and it was incredibly fulfilling to have that come to fruition. It's
been a fairly painless experience due to working with some of the best
developers I've met in over a decade, and it's been nothing short of amazing.

### Tooling

I added a ton of new software tools to my arsenal, being largely responsible
for building out our development and deployment processes. I spent a lot of
time getting up to speed with some amazing software such as
[South](http://south.aeracode.org/), [Fabric](http://fabfile.org/),
[NGINX](http://nginx.org/en/) and [gunicorn](http://gunicorn.org/). I've
recently been putting together a development and deployment guide that covers
combining all of these and other parts of our stack which I'll also publish in
the near future, so stay tuned for that.

### Django Dash

This was the first year I decided to put my Django skills to the test by
entering [Django Dash](http://djangodash.com/) — the 48 hour hackathon where
teams of 3 build a Django project from scratch. Teaming up with [Josh de
Blank](http://www.joshdeblank.com/) and [Andrew Fisher](http://ajfisher.me/),
the final result saw us launch [Rate My Flight](http://ratemyflight.org) which
earned us 8th place out of 40 teams internationally. It was a ton of fun
getting to interact with some of the wider Django community and I even picked
up a few new Django tricks along the way.

So that was 2010 — what a blast! I can't imagine what 2011 will bring if it
involves as much change and initiative as the previous year has. Bring it on!
